Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio
news.
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Jill Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> So Tracy, we're here in Alaska. We're
still here in Alaska.
>> We are. It's beautiful stunning and it's
bright. It stays light until like 11:00
p.m.
>> It's so bright. I couldn't believe it.
It's amazing. Alaska in August. It's the
best. It's already such a fascinating
place to me.
>> What iconic industries will we be
talking about while we're in Alaska,
Joe?
>> Well, there's many industries that we've
hit over and over. Obviously, we like to
talk to people in the trucking industry
for all kinds of reasons, but also like
one of the things that I'm aware of is
that Alaska has its own distinct
trucking culture. I think there was a
reality TV show about it, right? Ice
Road Truckers.
>> Yeah, right. Was it that based here?
>> Yes. I have questions about how
realistic that actually is. But you are
absolutely right that trucking in Alaska
is the sort of well-known thing. Maybe
because of the reality TV show, but when
you think about trucking in Alaska, you
think like these crazy like mudridd
roads and people having to cart these
like huge payloads of I don't know. I
heard it was mostly dirt in the
summertime cuz people are doing a lot of
road construction, but I don't know that
much about it.
>> I don't know that much about it.
Trucking is a fun topic to cover. A
because it's just an interesting
logistical industry in any environment.
And then B, I don't think anyone has a
better pulse on the economy at any given
moment than people in trucking. So while
we're here in Alaska for all these
obvious reasons, we got to talk
trucking.
>> I think you have to come clean, Joe, and
admit your secret dream to become an
owner operator working in Alaska. I
don't even know if that's possible.
>> Well, let's find out. I'm really excited
to say we really do have the perfect
guest. We're going to be speaking with
Josh Norm. He is the president and owner
of Sourdough Express. Josh, thank you so
much for uh coming on the podcast.
>> Yeah, thanks for having me.
>> What is Sourdough Express mean and what
is the company?
>> So Sour Express is a trucking company in
Alaska. All of our assets are based in
Alaska.
>> My family bought it in the 1920s. It's
been in existence since 1898. So we're
celebrating 127 years this year. We are
a all service trucking company. So we we
run the hall road, the ice roads up in
Purto Bay. We haul between Anchorage and
Fairbanks, which are the two main
population centers in Alaska. We also
own a moving and storage company that
focuses on DoD military members moving
in and out of Alaska's military bases.
>> Wow.
>> What is Sourdough actually mean in those
contexts? Because I hear Sourdough
Express and I think are you like, you
know, driving around huge huge loads of
baked goods?
>> Yeah. Most people think that we're a
bakery, but no. Sourdough is a basically
a long-term Alaskan. So somebody who's
been here for many years or experienced
winters here and and really understand
the culture of Alaska and understand
what it takes to live here.
>> So just one more question before we dig
into the now, but you said your family
bought this company in the 1920s and
it's existed into the late 1800s. What
was it actually in the early 1900s? Cuz
I assume you weren't, you know, it
wasn't big trucks back then.
>> Yeah. So most of uh the freight coming
into Alaska then was gold mining and
they were coming from Dawson City. And
so the owner Bob Ellis ended up coming
into Alaska and establishing in
Fairbanks and my family was working in
and out of the company through that time
and ended up purchasing it in 1923. And
the first years was not trucks. It was
dog sleds and sleds and I mean packers
and walking the trails
>> with the freight. And by the 1920s, the
pictures show that there are trucks and
makeshift roads that they're traveling
on. But most of it was not far. It was
makeshift trails that they were getting
where they needed to go to their mining
claims and and that. And as the
community established in Fairbanks, we
continued to grow and moved heavily into
heating fuel and the different supplies
that people needed to live in that
climate.
>> I already want to do this for like 3
hours. Like, right? Like we could just
like let's just talk.
>> Let's just start in 1920. Let's just go
decade by decade through the history.
I'm already fascinated. All right, but
let's just take it up to today. What are
the main goods that you move, whether
it's industrial, whatever it is, what
are the main things that are moved and
what are like the big routes?
>> So 70% of our freight is oil field
related and it's going up to Purto Bay
and generally it's coming into the port
of Anchorage and traveling up the road
through Fairbanks to Purto Bay. A lot of
it runs on the rail from Seattle area,
Tacoma up through the waterways to
Alaska and then from there they rail it
to Fairbanks and we pick it up there and
continue the journey to Prudo.
>> We do a lot of stuff down south to the
Kenai and basically anywhere on the road
system that needs freight, our trucks
will travel. We do not leave Alaska
because we feel that our assets are best
used here for for the freight that's
local. So most of our freight that comes
from outside is coming on the steam
ships that come into Alaska four times a
week.
>> If I'm a customer, I mean obviously this
will vary by customer, but what are the
decisions I'm making or what are the
constraints when I'm deciding whether to
send something by road, by rail versus a
ferry?
>> So there's generally three options that
people look at. One is over the road up
the Alcan Highway through Canada. And
that one's generally the quickest
because you can have a driver take it
from point A to point B, do the
checkpoints and and make it into Alaska
the quickest. The second fastest is
steamship. And so there's two companies
that run two boats each and they go from
Tacoma to Anchorage twice a week and
both of them are sailing on Sundays and
Tuesdays into Alaska. So I always tell
people that if you want to get fresh
groceries, go after the boats come cuz
that's when everything shows up. Um,
there's also barge, which that travels
more on a set schedule, and there's a
few different barge companies in Alaska,
and that's slower freight, but it's
generally more economical to to ship.
So, there's there's different options.
>> The ship from Tacoma to Alaska, how long
does that take?
>> Uh, 3 days.
>> Okay. You know, you said all your assets
stay in Alaska. Like, how long are these
routes? How long are the drivers on the
road? Like, how talk to us about like
those routes that they do and how tough
that is. So, as grueling as the roads
are in Alaska, the truckers actually
have a pretty decent schedule compared
to lower 48 truckers.
>> All the routes can pretty much be a
two-day route no matter which way you
go. So, the ones going from Fairbanks to
Purto Bay. Those ones generally leave
Fairbanks on a Monday. They go to Purto
Bay, they deliver their load, spend the
night, and then come back on a Tuesday.
So, they're getting home every other
night doing that doing that route.
>> That is better than a lot of drivers in
the lower 48.
>> Yep. And most of them have done lower 48
freight and love that they're home that
consistently. The other routes are
generally Anchorage to Fairbanks,
Fairbanks to Anchorage. And those ones
you can do roundtrip in a night. So
those guys are home almost every night.
>> Are there special skills you need to be
a trucker in Alaska versus elsewhere or
in the lower 48? Do I have to be really,
really good at taking chains on and off
my tires?
>> You definitely chain up consistently in
Alaska. The thing that we look for the
most in our drivers is teachability.
Drivers that are willing to learn and
learn from the people who've been doing
it for years and years. There's a lot of
things that they teach you in truck
driving school and down in lower 48 that
technically is the correct way to do
something, but in the situations they're
in, it can cause issues that you can't
recover from. So, there's a lot of small
technical
>> Give us some examples. What are some
things that people encounter here that
they don't encounter elsewhere?
>> Sure. One of the big things is running
for hills. A lot of times in the states,
people they'll run and get speed up for
hills. But in Prudo on the road there,
it's almost critical that you run for
hills. And
>> what does that mean?
>> You have to speed up.
>> So you have to speed up to get over the
hill.
>> So you know you're coming up on a hill
and everyone has call outs. So everyone
has rados in their truck and they're
calling out truck whatever's coming up
the hill and so everyone waits at the
top
>> and basically you just get speed and
then your momentum carries you as far as
you can before you start downshifting.
And it's critical in the winter time
because if you start slow, you will
never gain traction. So you will be
stopping and chain at every single hill
where there's generally a few hills you
chain consistently. If you run at them,
you can usually momentum up and over a
lot of them without having to do that.
So it saves significant amount of time
and and energy for the driver having to
get out and and chaining up on that road
is not a fun experience. generally it's
20 30 below and once you get up further
north it's windy and it's dark it it's
not a pleasant experience. So any tricks
like that that you can incorporate
really help their time and their quality
of life.
>> You mentioned the radio just then and
this was going to be one of my questions
which is like are people able to use the
radio out here and are they on like
citizens band or something else?
>> They're on CB radios just like anywhere
and they they have channels that they
run on. A lot of trucks have we call
them the big radio which goes further
and they can it's usually like more of a
a chatting station but on the CVS
>> is there a lot of chatting just because
you're in Alaska and you're sort of on
your own on a big highway or something.
>> There's a lot of chatting but everyone
knows each other. So generally on that
road if you go up in one day and you
come back in a day you're passing all
your friends either way at some point.
So
>> they all know each other by their truck
what they look like. They can tell on
the radio. So, a lot of it's just them
checking with each other. How's your
trip going? Beautiful day. Man, that
hill was icy. Whatever it is, hey,
there's there's caribou ahead. A lot of
it's just banter back and forth between
friends on the radio that help each
other out.
>> The Hall Road is very special in the
sense that if a truck is pulled over and
has an issue, everybody's going to stop.
Oh, that's cool.
>> Nobody's going to drive by him without
checking to make sure he's doing okay
and and that he doesn't need help. So,
that's a pretty special thing that you
don't see everywhere. I know there's
there's some places that people will
stop and help, but in Alaska, it's
almost critical that you do because
somebody could be in
>> Yeah.
>> in trouble. So,
>> someone told me that like used cars are
more expensive in Alaska. I don't know
if that's true. Actually, I haven't gone
to verify that, but I'm just curious
about like the cost of like the physical
Yeah. your physical assets. Like is
there a significant price gap between
just what you pay for any sort of piece
equipment whether it's the truck or some
part or etc in Alaska versus the rest of
the country?
>> Sometimes it's hard to compare because
we don't have a sales tax.
>> Oh.
>> So without a sales tax a lot of times
that reduces the price right back to
where the cost of getting the goods here
is offset by not having that sales tax.
So, I can honestly say that I've not
noticed a huge difference in prices
between food, used cars, a lot of the
stuff that we ship up business-wise,
like big trucks and that, we are dealing
with the shipping ourselves. So,
depending how we want to drive it or
what we want to do with that, we're
paying the the cost at manufacturer and
and hauling it up.
>> What about fuel costs? Because I guess
there's two things. There's the price of
fuel out here, and I know there's a big,
you know, oil industry, but I don't know
if you actually refine that much. So, I
don't know what gas prices actually look
like. But then secondly, I imagine when
you're out in, you know, middle of
nowhere Alaska, there probably aren't
that many places to have fuel stops for.
And I guess maybe you have to be more
strategic about where you're stopping to
refuel.
>> Yeah. So, I would say fuel is definitely
more expensive than say in Texas or the
place where they have big refineries. We
do refine some fuel in Alaska. Not a
lot. We have the pipeline going right
through the middle and a lot of it just
goes south and and gone. But they do
refine some. I don't think we save on
price by doing that. It's just more of a
an efficiency thing. Fuel stops are
extremely important. So our big trucks
that go to Purto Bay have 300-gallon
tanks on them. And there's only one gas
station between leaving Fairbanks and
Purto Bay which is almost 500 miles.
Wow.
>> So generally
>> you don't want to run out of fuel.
>> You don't want to run out of fuel.
There's not a lot of a lot of options.
And people are used to driving in the
country and they see farms and they see,
okay, there's a truck stop. And when you
leave these communities like Fairbanks
and you go north, there's nothing. It's
just woods and there's no one to help
except the other truckers on the road.
You'll see the tourists and the hunters,
but
>> there's nowhere to stop. So drivers when
they pull over, they're stopping on the
side of like a pulloff, just a little
spot to stop, but there's no bathrooms
or showers or anything like that. So
planning your trips and where you get
fuel. You can get fuel in Puruto, but
it's more than double the cost of fuel
in Fairbanks.
>> So, you definitely plan your fuel and
carry a lot of it.
So, we're recording this August 5th,
2025. How's business right now? or how
does it compare to August 5th, 2024?
>> Business has been very good and very
steady. Um, a few of the different oil
companies in Alaska have put a lot of
investment and a lot of bets on the
future and investing.
>> Oh, yeah. Chris Wright, the energy
secretary was, I think, in Alaska not
too long ago like anyway,
>> we had a big delegation come up here and
they went to Prudo to pumping the gas
line up, the potential gas line that
they're trying to get approved. But the
overall investment in the oil fields and
the downstream effects of that of people
coming up to work those and the good
jobs it creates that then trickles
through the rest of the economy. So a
lot of our business is also groceries
and lumber and housing supplies and
basically anything that a worker on the
slope that we also provide drilling pipe
to. They still need everything back at
their house when they're on their off
shift. So the overall ass economy has
been been healthy. There hasn't been a
huge growth, I don't think, but I think
it's replaced a lot of what was on a
downward slide 5 10 years ago.
>> So, one of the things we've learned from
doing all these trucking episodes over
and over again is that it is an
extremely cyclical industry. And
supposedly a lot of that, at least in
the lower 48, is because there are
really low barriers to entry. So, if
people see freight rates start to go up,
they think, "Oh, I'm going to get a
truck. I'm going to get my CDL and then
I'm going to make the big money driving
this truck around. I'm curious in
Alaska, is it the same way? Do you see
those sorts of boom bust cycles where
you have lots of new entrance flood the
market and then freight rates start
going down and people start going out of
business and then eventually you go
through the cycle once again.
>> I would say Alaska's entire economy is
that exact situation. And so in trucking
we have company drivers and most
companies that are at a scale that we
are at have company drivers but they
also use owner operators or they use
contractors which they hire on for the
busy times and those contractors over
the years have become very flexible. So
when times are not good a lot of times
they'll head south when you need them
again you call them and they'll come
back up and start hauling again. So, I
would say that people do buy more trucks
and try to start their businesses during
the really good times, but a lot of
examples of truckers who've done that
and not been successful when it does
decline. It seems like we've done it
enough that the truckers are getting
more savvy to know how much they can
spend and instead of buying five trucks,
they buy one truck or two trucks and
they keep those trucks busy with the
flexibility of going out and finding
other work down in the States. because
as an owner operator, you can go out of
business very quickly if there's a few
slow months.
>> How has Sourdough Express stayed in
business so long? Like, you know, at
this point, I'm sure you've like, have
there been any near-death experiences in
the last century or any close calls in
there?
>> Yeah. So, through the generations, I'm
fifth generation owner of Souo and my
business partner is my mother and she's
a a CPA and been a CFO for Souo for 30
years and she's extremely conservative.
So, she's told me stories of the history
of the generations and her ability to
save and plan for the future for those
bad times, I think, is why we've been so
successful. When the big shiny loads are
sitting out there, we don't always run
at them. We let those go and we continue
servicing our customers that have been
dedicated customers and reliable freight
for years. And with her management of
those assets and over time, I think it's
it's been very successful. But I can
tell you that we're in a minority in
that sense where there's been a lot of
trucking companies come and go over the
years that we've we've seen come up and
go down. And I would say her ability to
plan has been the biggest asset to sour
in the last 30 years.
>> What would be a shiny load in that
context? Is it like, you know, some oil
company needs something like right some
crucial component for a pipeline or
something and they need it right now and
so they're paying loads of money.
>> That could be an example. I mean, it's
just anybody who needs something very
quickly that requires a lot of assets.
And so sometimes they they dangle that
out there and trucking companies, well,
I'll go buy 10 trucks and I can do that.
2015 was a good example of where the oil
companies had come and said, "Hey, we're
going to produce all this oil." And
there's a good chance for growth. We
ended up everyone purchased trucks and
got ready and then the oil prices
crashed. And so, no fault to them, but
they couldn't sell oil at a profit. And
so, they had to pull back the loads. and
coming back around, I think everyone was
a little more cautious, but we've also
learned with them as a group that works
together cuz if we're not successful,
they're not successful and vice versa
that we're able to to plan better and
adjust how the loads work to make sure
that the freight gets there without that
risk of the boom bust. So, we've done a
lot better job, I'd say, in the last 10
years of planning those cycles and how
that's going to work. Joe, I feel like I
have to say that we are in Anchorage and
so listeners might hear the train going
by just that it's very atmospheric.
>> It's very atmospheric and actually sort
of walking through Anchorage like you
turn your head and you see like ports
facilities and you see oil facilities
right there and so it does feel like
just walking through here. We are in
this hub of logistics industry and
commerce and you can certainly hear it.
You know what I'm curious about? Um, how
does a family keep people in Alaska?
Because I have to imagine that a lot of
young people generally speaking. It's
like, yeah, some tough, dark, long
winters and maybe get attracted to like,
oh, it might be nice to move to Los
Angeles or something like that sometime.
Talk to us about like just the culture
of like who stay the type of people who
stay in Alaska over generations.
>> Yeah. No, I think that a lot of people
have been here for a long time, they
like what Alaska has to offer outside of
the cities. So, a lot of people you talk
to have cabins and have
>> places they go and spend time and they
build those family units that are strong
and based on these experiences they've
had together.
>> A lot of people when they graduate high
school do go out to the states and they
go to college and they get their degree.
And my sister's a good example where she
went out and she was gone for 10 years
and decided that she could be an eye
doctor in Alaska just as easy as she
could be in Oklahoma. So, she ended up
moving back with her family
>> more so to just get that family unit
that that she had been looking for. I
think that a lot of people like the
community that it has to offer and for
some reason the misery of living here in
the winter I think brings people
together too. I I'm not quite sure on
that but I'm I've been here for a while
so
>> well in the summer it is very very nice
I have to say I haven't seen it in the
winter but right now it's beautiful.
>> You know what the flip side of 11:30
is you know
>> I lived in London and it getting dark at
3 p.m. in December was bad enough I
imagine it's even worse here. Okay, this
is my moment to just ask, can we get
some ice road trucker type stories?
Like, tell us some of the hariest
moments when you know you or one of your
drivers is on like the Dalton Highway or
something like that.
>> So, I've driven the road twice in my
career. I had got my CDO when I was 19
and I I mostly worked on the moving side
of our company moving and storage. And
so, I never did the ice road long term,
but I did drive a couple loads up there
and got to experience what that was like
as a driver. The benefit to our trucks
now is we have cameras in every truck.
>> So when stuff does happen, we have very
good vantage points of exactly what that
is. And it was probably four years ago,
the best camera footage I've seen is we
were climbing out of Pass, which is on
the Dalton. And out of the corner of the
camera, it was night, but you could see
snow starting to come and an entire
avalanche came down and pushed the truck
up against the guardrail. And when
everything came still, the snow was over
the front and he was just sitting in an
avalanche that then he had to wait for
the loaders to come up and and dig him
back out. We've had uh a few of those
avalanche type stories. That was the the
biggest one. We consistently see
wildlife every day. You can see caribou
or wolves or bears on the road and
moving out in front of the trucks.
>> Do wildlife pose a danger? You talk
about having to chain the tires
>> when you're out. Like is there any risk?
You're just like when you're out of the
cab. So is there any danger to the
driver in those situations?
>> Yes. And they've gotten smarter over the
years. Back in the 70s and 80s when it
was kind of the good old days, they used
to feed a lot of the animals, I think,
and the animals got very used to that.
And we have a lot of pictures of bears
standing up to windows and taking food
back in the 70s. Drivers have gotten a
lot smarter since then about inviting
the wildlife to the trucks. And uh there
are notices posted.
>> This were the good old days, weren't
they?
>> The bears were out of your This is what
they took from this is what they took
from us. Yeah.
>> But they do post notices and you'll hear
on the Facebook groups and on the
communications that, hey, there's a bear
at milepost 212. Make sure you watch out
when you're chaining up or I mean there
are situations. They they had a wolf
problem last year at one of the
construction sites that the pilot cars
had to really be paying attention to.
And so there are risks to that.
generally it's not an issue, but over
the years there definitely have been
stories.
>> You know, you mentioned cameras in the
trucks and this reminded me, but is
there technology that people are using
out in Alaska that might mitigate some
of the like Alaska specific dangers? Do
you have better weather forecasting
technology or do you pay more attention
to the forecasts? Like, are there
specific things you're doing with tech
that might make it easier for your
drivers?
>> I would say Facebook groups.
>> Oh.
>> Oh, say more about that. This is really
interesting. So, Facebook groups is just
an example, but text threads and the
different communication between the
drivers that are traveling it every day.
They all have their groups of guys they
know and hey, I just went through this
mile post. It was really bad. You might
as well stay home until tomorrow. It'll
get better by tomorrow. And so, their
feedback is way quicker than the
weather, way more accurate. And their
ability to to get that through the road
is uncanny. So, I I think that
camaraderie between the drivers is
really what keeps that road safer. So, I
take it there were wildfires this summer
in Alaska.
>> This summer was a dry beginning of the
summer and there were a few that were
very close to the road. There's two ways
to get from anchors to Fairbanks and so
we had to send our trucks the longer
route this summer for about a week
because they had so much activity next
to the road and it wasn't a reliable
route to send the trucks to get stuff
through. So, we had to deal with that
over the years. a few years ago south of
Anchorage, there was a lot of them that
it was delaying the drivers on a nightly
basis waiting for openings to to get
through.
>> Oh yeah. On this topic, is there
seasonality in this business in the
sense that some routes are only open at
certain times of the year? So I I heard,
you know, for instance, some roads have
to be frozen for the trucks to go over
them. And then I also heard that there
are some trucks going over like actual
frozen water. So you have to wait for
the water to freeze before you can
actually get to this specific part of
the world.
>> So the the big ones that everyone talks
about are the ice roads up in Purau Bay.
And most of those are not actually
frozen lakes or rivers that they're
crossing. There are some, but most of it
is they're building up the ice to
protect the tundra so that when the ice
does melt, there's no damage to the
tundra. So if you fly over four-wheeler
trails that in the summer, you can see
where all those vehicles went. But if
you go up to Purau and fly over the oil
fields, you can see no trace of trucks
because they build those roads up so
strong. They do go out on the ice in
certain areas, but it's very controlled
and very measured. There was a Netflix
movie about that, I think, a few years
ago. There was like it was not a reality
show
>> about protecting tundras or
>> ice just about like those like the the
literal like going over the frozen water
and stuff like that. No, I forgot about
it was really stressful. They always
they in the shows in the reality shows
they obviously dramatic.
>> They over they overbake a little bit.
>> They overbake a little bit and nobody
would go on them if they were that
unsafe.
>> Yeah. In the movie it made it look like
it was a 50% chance in any given time of
like making
>> the volume of trucks that travel on it
and they're they have dedicated crews
that just maintain those roads on a
daily basis. It's it's not something
that anybody's willing to risk.
>> So something I'm curious about is are
the tariffs showing up in any way that
you notice in your business? Have they
had an effect on anything? Maybe even
with, you know, Alaska, Canada trade or
anything like that.
>> We haven't seen significant ones yet in
our pricing other than we pre-ordered a
lot of stuff with the anticipation of
tariffs that might not have
>> And when you say pre-order stuff, is
this like equipment or parts or
something like that?
>> Mostly parts. So parts that were
specifically tire chains. We ordered a
lot of tire chains, a lot of gear that
was related to
>> So you're sitting at You're still
sitting on inventory from some of this
that you've pre-ordered.
>> We're prepared for winter.
What's the big constraint on your
business now? Like if you had to name a
single frustration that is stopping you
from growing further, what would it be?
You know, whether it's labor or I don't
know, money available for capital
investment, regulation, what would it
be? I would say it's probably the
availability of work. So the more that
they open up the oil fields and allow us
to to produce on them, I think that's
going to be the biggest factor to
growing all of the businesses in Alaska.
They've proven over and over again that
they can continually do it safely and
that we're one of the cleanest producers
in the world. And so as they open those
up and responsibly start producing them,
that's what grows the Alaska economy is
when we construct those sites and then
produce over the long term. The oil
pipeline since it was built has declined
in in volume that has traveled through
it and for the last couple years is the
first time it's upticked again. So
that's a very positive thing for Alaska
because it's kind of the lifeline of
almost all Alaskans is the oil and gas
industry. DoD is not very far behind
with the Department of Defense spending,
but for what really drives Alaska, it's
oil and gas development. So,
>> you said DoD just then, and I noticed at
the airport there was like a military
lounge. So, I guess like military is a
big presence here, right? Like what
exactly is going on? I should know this
already, but like what is happening
here?
>> You're looking over the water at the
Russians.
>> Yeah. No, I get that. But like what
exactly is here? So in Anchorage, which
is where we're sitting now, there's a
joint air force and army base that's
fairly large. If you go north to
Fairbanks, there's an air force base and
an army base separated, but also very
large. That that air force base is used
for all the training for a lot of our
allies. They come there in the summer
and you see fighter jets parked all over
and they're doing war games.
>> Outside of Fairbanks, they have Fort
Gley, which is missile silos and they're
it's more of a protection base and then
on the other side they have clear air
force base which is more of a
identification base where they they're
able to monitor closer to our enemies.
>> All right, I'm going to ask a a hot
button question that I know divides much
of the freight community, but is there a
truck driver shortage?
>> I don't think there's a truck driver
shortage. I think that there is an
industry that has put truck drivers in
positions over the years where maybe
some of them have left their profession
or told their kids not to join the
profession. I think there's a lot of
quality truck drivers out of there. I
think there's a lot of companies who
don't treat their truck drivers the way
they should be treated and so that they
have a shortage of employees more so to
do with their policies and the
requirements of what they expect of
their drivers rather than what they give
back to them. So at Souro, we've always
tried to treat our drivers as best as
possible. We give them schedules that
are familyfriendly and we understand
that life happens. And so I think that's
been a huge benefit for us and not just
taking drivers for granted that they
just keep coming through the door to
really develop your drivers and and make
them the high quality drivers that they
can be.
>> I have another I have another hot button
question. So you've you know your
family's owned
>> is it going to be self-driving ice
trucks? In a hundred years, your
family's had the company about 100
years. Will there be human drivers in a
hundred years?
>> I have no opinion on that one. I I think
that would be a very hard road to do an
actual selfd driving truck.
>> I think if they came up with some sort
of rail system or something, they could
they could potentially do it, but it
would require an extreme amount of
investment to set that up just because
the train's so extreme.
>> That road does not have lines on it. The
road shoulders change every mile. the
snow how they plow it changes every
year. So I think it would be an
extremely extremely hard road to send a
a truck driving itself up.
>> Have you seen any effect yet from labor
related policies yet from this
administration that in any way has like
affected the business for better or
worse?
>> No, we have not.
>> If you're in a bar in Fairbanks or
wherever with a bunch of other sourders,
what do you sourdough people?
>> Sour sourdough.
>> Sourdough.
>> Sourdoughs and trucking buddies. What's
getting you guys riled up? Like what is
the topic of conversation? Duour,
>> most of it goes from stories on the road
back to family camping trips and hunting
trips and fishing trips and what they're
doing on their off time. The the
trucking industry in Alaska pays very
well. So most of the drivers have the
ability to buy snow machines and
four-wheelers and and go out and
experience what Alaska actually has to
offer besides city life. And most
truckers are very independent and they
like that lifestyle. So, I would say
it's it's mostly comparing camping
stories.
>> If there's someone who's just like a
young guy looking for direction in the
world, if they come to Alaska and can
they probably find a job eventually if
they go through the CDL training, etc.
Like, yeah. Is this someone in the lower
48 looking for direction, looking for
maybe some adventure and excitement and
decent pay and that sort of lifestyle?
Like, is there demand for it that uh
right now? So, we've learned over the
years that a lot of people have this
dream of Alaska. Yeah. And until they
come here, they don't quite realize what
that dream is. They just know that it's
this vast place that they want to go and
spend time. So, we always recommend
people come and visit it, not in the
summer, but in the winter to make sure
it's a place that they want to be.
>> And then we have a lot of very good
truck driving schools. So, if they come
without a CDL, in 3 weeks you can get
your CDL. And there's a lot of
opportunity locally in the different
cities to learn to be a truck driver.
And so patience is the biggest one. And
people knowing that the first day they
get in that truck, they're not driving
the hall road. They're they're going to
be delivering produce to Fred Meyers or
they're going to be delivering lumber to
to Spanard Builder Supply. It's
patience. And then also the like I had
mentioned earlier, the willingness to
learn from the the experienced drivers
who have done it for years and years.
And drivers are very generous with their
knowledge as long as you're willing to
learn it. As soon as you start pushing
back, most drivers don't want to teach
you anymore because it's not worth their
time. So, there's definitely an
opportunity to to grow your career and
make a a life in Alaska. You just have
to be patient.
>> I'm going to ask the flip side of Joe's
question, which is, is there anything
that people are underestimating about
the Alaskan truck driver experience or
something that people might have
misconceptions about when they're
stareyed, youthful, wouldbe Alaska truck
drivers? So, if you're talking ice road
trucking, which is what the show is
based on, I think that the show
romanticized it in the way that it's
kind of this very fun and entertaining
thing, but the road from Fairbanks to
Peru is 12 hours long and you're by
yourself the whole time. So, I think a
lot of people underestimate how much
time they spend alone. And you're not
sleeping at truck stops. You're not
seeing people in person. and you're
talking to them on the radio, but you're
not getting that interaction that a lot
of truckers in the states are used to
walking in. And you you have one spot,
cold foot, Alaska, to to stop and see
people. But I think the the lonesomeness
of it and then coming back to the
terminal and going home to a
>> in the winter it's very dark. I think
the darkness is what really drives a lot
of people back out of Alaska. The cold's
not fun either, but you can turn the
heater on, you can put a jacket on.
Actually, I did have one more question
related to this, which is you mentioned
it's like you're truly in the middle of
nowhere. There aren't gas stations
anywhere. If there is some sort of an
accident or something like that, what
are the sort of like state level
infrastructure for like emergency
response out there? Like can is there a
helicopter that
>> helicopters? Yeah.
>> State troopers have helicopters that
they will fly out. The problem with
helicopters is you got to be able to
land it somewhere and a lot of the roads
not
>> wide enough for in a position where they
can land. So, generally the first
responders are other truckers and a lot
of them have training on what to do with
an injured driver or or something like
that. You can call the different towns
on either side of it, but I mean it
could be eight hours before you see an
actual ambulance or something. So, a lot
of it is very remote and requires the
help of your your fellow truck driver or
>> and weather restricted too. If you're in
trouble because there's a storm, then a
helicopter is not going to be able to
get to you. This year the road washed
out too, but it wasn't for very long.
But they've had years where the the road
gets shut down by avalanches and there's
a bunch of drivers stacked up and the
road's too small to turn around. So
you're stuck facing the avalanche and
it's it's been a couple of days or they
they send fuel trucks out to go fuel the
truck so they can continue running and
and staying safe and hand out food. But
most of the drivers carry
>> the drivers create like a little camp
for themselves. I have this vision in my
head of like a group of like 12 truck
drivers just campire.
>> Yeah. Getting along in the wilderness
while they wait for the avalanche to get
cleared.
>> I definitely think there's probably a
lot of stuff that they they don't feed
back to us. I don't know if if the
campfire is included, but
>> Josh Norham, president and owner of
Sourdough Express, thank you so much for
uh coming on.
>> Yeah, thank you guys for having me.
Tracy, that was a lot of fun. You know,
it's funny thinking about like, you
know, obviously Alaska as, you know, a
literal gold rush place and then this
idea that the whole state is a big boom
bus cycle, right? Because if you start
with gold mining and then you're very
levered to the oil industry. Yeah. So
it's like trucking is like truly the the
tail end of the whip. It sounds like
>> cyclical squared.
>> Yeah. Cyclical squared. Yeah. Right.
>> The other thing I was thinking about is,
you know, in terms of new technology,
Josh mentioned the cameras, but also you
got to imagine something like Starlink
would have a big impact on drivers
quality of life. uh if you're driving
out where there's no cell service, maybe
if you have Starlink, you finally have a
chance to download a Netflix movie or
download all your favorite podcasts so
you don't feel so lonely on the road.
But then, you know, he mentioned
Facebook as just
>> a messaging network for the drivers. And
this is something that I really didn't
get until like two years ago when I got
the house in rural Connecticut, which is
like Facebook is essential in rural
parts of the country. Like that is
actually the local network and that's
where when people see a bear coming
through, you know, the neighborhood,
that's where people post it. Yeah. Or,
you know, maybe your like neighbor will
text you directly or something, but like
all that local info is going on
Facebook. That is uh that is really
interesting. Also like is not the first
time that trucking specifically is still
an industry that runs on like sort of
group chats and WhatsApp pages
WhatsApp channels etc like that even
message the message boards
>> like that technology that power is like
clearly still like deeply embedded into
like sort of core industrial
you know the core it's core
infrastructure for what makes the
economy run. Well, all of logistics,
right? It's uh Sven in the port in uh in
Europe or whatever, right?
>> Yeah. Right. Right. And yeah, I mean, as
you noted, it really feels like this is
a logistics hub. You can the listeners
can literally hear it while we're doing
the episode.
>> Oh, yeah. I mean, when you get to the
airport, you can already realize it's a
logistics hub. Like, I know our producer
Dash was talking about people carrying
fish through the airport. There's the
military lounges in the airport because
you have the big military air bases and
when you're coming in you can see all
that infrastructure so you do get that
sense.
>> Yeah.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Alaway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Next time you're
shipping oil industry equipment, call up
Josh at the sourdough express. Follow
our producers Kerman Rodriguez at Kerman
Arman, Dashel Bennett at Dashbot, and
Kellbrooks at Kalebrooks. For more
OddLotss content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes, and you can chat about
these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when Joe and I go to Alaska, then please
leave us a positive review on your
favorite podcast platform. And remember,
if you are a Bloomberg subscriber, you
can listen to all of our episodes
absolutely adree. All you need to do is
find the Bloomberg channel on Apple
Podcast and follow the instructions
there. Thanks for listening.